And so it was, back then the core voted in such a
block anyway that it would have been hard and
civilians didn't come to the polls for some
reason. And, but that allowed me to cut into a lot of
the civilian student body vote and as a result of it
kind of. Now we'll get back to that year as student
body president. Let's go back to academics.
you're in class, what did you and your buddies
think was the, were the guidelines for class
attendance and conduct and so forth? Oh, gosh, you
know, the first couple years, we all thought, boy,
you got to be there every time or the devil will
swoop down on you and haul you off. By the time we
were juniors, we kind of got the impression, you
don't necessarily have to be at every one of them if
you have somebody else that can help you take notes
and stuff like that. But for the first couple
years, I mean, I think attendance was pretty
serious. Plus, the folks in your outfit, the
upperclassmen, grades were then becoming a big
deal. Your outfit could go away if you didn't have
them and stuff like that. And so they made us study
each night. What about being awake in class? Um...
Yeah, I never did have too much problem with that.
There was a bunch of dozers, though, guys in the
Corps that, and maybe I wasn't in an outfit that,
you know, did stuff like that, but we, I mean,
lights went off at 10 o'clock or something in our
outfit or, you know, like that, so we didn't have
too much trouble with that, but there were, I
remember there were a lot of professors upset,
particularly with fish in the Corps who seemed to
be snoring a little bit in class, particularly the
big classes like biology, zoology, and places
like that where they might have, it seemed to me,
four or five hundred kids in it. Did you, in the
first year or two, did you have any courses that
were really tough to pass? Everybody thought
English was a tough course. I never thought
English was a very tough course. I don't know. I
thought I was horrible at math. I had to do the
remedial deal and the whole bit. Which I'm sure is
why I became the chief financial officer of the
state of Texas. I learned to hire good math people.
But math was real hard for me. That's why I'm glad I
went into political science instead of something
that required an awful lot of math. So I worked real
hard to steer clear of math and chemistry and stuff
like that. Foreign languages were tough for me.
When I discovered that I had to have four semesters
of foreign language, I went into a Spanish class
and everybody there was named Rodriguez, and I
said, this ain't the place for me. And so I went in a
French class, and everybody there was named
Dubois, and I said, that's not the place for me. And
I walked into a Russian class, and I thought,
there's only one guy here named George Zaychevsky
that can speak this stuff. I'm starting on the same
level as everybody else, and so I did. The lucky
thing for me At the end of the first class period,
the professor, his name was John Skravanek, and he
was asking everybody, he said, you know, where are
you from and all this kind of stuff. And it's a true
story. This sounds unbelievable. But it's the
reason I stayed in the class. He asked me, he said,
where are you from? And I said, I'm from Placido,
Texas. He said, Placido, Texas? Where is that? He
said, that's in Victoria County, isn't it? And I
said, that's amazing. You know where Placido,
Texas is? And he said, listen, when I was at the
University of Texas teaching Czech, and he taught
that here too, the best student I ever had in my life
was from Placido, Texas. And I said, really?
That's amazing. He said, what was his name? He
said, it was a her. I said, well, what was her name?
He said, Venus Mark. And I said, that's my mother.
It's a true story. I said, you've got to be kidding
me. And I tell him, he said, that's your mother? I
said, yeah, Venus Marks. She married Melbourne
Sharp, and I'm her youngest son. And he said, that
is absolutely amazing. Let's go call your mother.
So we go over there, and we call mom and said, mom,
who is your Czech teacher? at the University of
Texas, and you better get this right." And she
said, oh, Dr. John Skravanek, he was a great
teacher. Of course, mother spoke Czech before she
spoke English. And he gets on the phone and all this
kind of stuff, and so I'm thinking I had a little
help as I wormed my way through Russian. And
probably your second year, you had Gary Halter.
What made him special in your academic life? Oh,
because Gary just loved politics and he loved to
talk about politics and he loved to talk about it in
class and outside of class. I wrote a paper one time
and they asked us to talk about, I guess Watergate
maybe was going on that particular time, and they
asked us to analyze a political figure and I wrote
this paper. I hope I've lost it by now. comparing
Nixon to Hitler, and I found striking
similarities. That raised Halter's eyebrows a
little bit, but, you know, I don't know. And you
turned to, what kind of advice did he give you? It
wasn't about politics, but he just, he gives me
much more political advice now on things. But then
he talked about, we didn't talk about careers
because I don't think any of us were thinking about
running for stuff back then, although it's
amazing how that group all did. I guess we couldn't
get jobs in the private sector. But he would talk to
me about courses that he thought were interesting
and stuff like that, and we'd talk about politics
some, but just in terms of what was existing that
particular day. I don't think we talked about,
hey, when you get out of school, you ought to think
about this or that, or run for something. If you
were wondering what courses to take, I'd always go
to him. You'd go to him. And as you look back, his
advice was good advice. Yeah, I think good advice.
He helped me a lot. How was it better to be a
sophomore at A&M than to be a freshman? Whoa, whoa,
in the Corps, it was just night and day. I mean, you
know, granted you weren't out of the woods yet, but
and the pressure to me, I mean some of the kids would
say, It's the physical stuff, but the mental
stuff, I just never got used to anybody screaming
at me and telling me what a lowlife I was and all this
kind of stuff. It wasn't until years later that you
kind of look back and appreciate what that was. I'm
not sure the people doing it. It's just in the
system and it takes you, it really strips you of
your pride and everything else and then you have to
kind of build it back as you're as you're doing that
with other folks. But the sophomore year was
remarkably different. The junior year, I
remember the feeling of taking my shoes off and
walking on grass my senior year and thinking what
an amazing feeling this is to be able to walk on
something other than cement.
Were there, in those days, were there any easy
courses that were kind of legendary for making
grades? Yeah, there were some jock courses. You
had to figure out which ones the jocks took. And I
never did a very good job of figuring those out. I
just heard about them. But apparently there were
some, at the time there were some economics
courses and a couple other things that football
players at the time knew which ones to take. I got in
one of those. one time, which I thought was kind
of... Did it turn out to be an easy? It turned out to
be pretty easy. Yeah. At the final exam, the
professor left and locked the door. I thought that
was kind of interesting. I'm sitting back here
thinking, this guy's got video cameras. You guys
better quit doing all this stuff. I never partook
in it because I thought it was a sting operation or
something like that. It wasn't. Were there any
courses that were supposedly highly respected
that you and your colleagues heard about, hey,
this is a course you ought to take? Yeah. That was an
option for us? Yeah. Yeah. Some economics
courses. A guy named Ashcroft. Ashcroft was
history. Was it history? Ashcroft was history?
Yeah. Well, it wasn't Graham. I know Graham thinks
that I took a course under him, but I never did have
that. I didn't know Phil until after I'd already
graduated. But there was some economics course. I
guess I can't remember who the professor was. As
you look back on your four years here... And there
was a literary course, Great Books it was called,
that I thought was exceptional. Somebody told me
it was. It was really good. Do you remember who? I
don't remember. It was a lady. As you look back, who
were the celebrity students while you were here?
Oh, gosh. Well, when I was a freshman, when I was a
fish, it was Hector Gutierrez. I mean, he was
commander of the Corps, and he carried himself
like he was commander of the Corps. And I remember
him kind of walking along with his four diamonds,
and everybody pretty much thought that's either
God or right-hand aid, you know, to him or
something like that, so. Did you all become
acquainted? No. Didn't know him at all. I was just a
fish in the Corps. We're good friends now, but I
didn't, I didn't know him at all. Was the fact that
he was Hispanic and Corps Commander, did the, the
fact that he was Minard, did that matter to
anybody? Uh, I don't, that wouldn't have
registered on me because the class I came from was
90 percent, you know, the high school and grade
school I came from was a majority Hispanic and so it
wouldn't have... Like what little I know about the
way things were done then, I had the impression
that Hector was selected for one reason, that he
was the best. The fact he was Hispanic was totally
coincidental. Yeah, I think that's probably
right. It was probably true of Henry the year
before. I didn't know Cisneros because he
graduated in May of 68 and was a White House fellow
and I came in the fall of 68. So I didn't know Henry
until years later. other celebrity students in
your four years? Oh, in the whole four years? Well,
I don't know.
Lane Cruz was one. He was a class below me. He was a
Rhodes Scholar. And he kind of followed me on
everything political. He was the student life
chairman after I was and became the student body
president after me. Literally almost ran for
everything that I ran. We were real close friends.
And so you actually had a group of folks there that
sometimes were on opposite sides. Caperton
started this deal called the Fifth Wheel. And I was
one of the few, me and a guy named Nick Jigger, were
the only two Corps members that were in that deal.
And some of my friends in the Corps didn't like that
deal. that very much wound up to be a pretty good
deal when I was a senior because I met a lot of
civilian students and as well as people in the
Corps. So you had, gosh you had, in that student
senate, my junior and senior year, you had Jerry
Geisweit, who became a state representative from
Mason. You had
Kent Caperton, who became a state senator from
Bryan. He had Gary Morrow, who became land
commissioner for 16 years or however long he was.
Chet wasn't here yet, was he? Who's that? Chet
Edwards. Chet, sure was. He was a class below me.
But Chet was in the Student Senate, but became real
big in Skona. Chet did his doing the MSC, and I would
have named Chet. Hackney was a member of the
Student Senate, became a state representative
from From Houston, Perry became a state
representative from Haskell, then Land
Commissioner, then Lieutenant Governor.
There's a bunch more. What was the stimulus? I
don't know. I don't think any of us have ever been
able to figure it out. If you look at before that
class, that two or three year group of people, you
can count the number of people, the number of
Aggies that were in the Texas legislature on your
fingers. I mean, there's just Bill Moore, Peyton
McKnight, Babe Swartz, and kind of Dick Slack. I
mean, just every now and then. But all of a sudden,
but that particular class, it's like everybody
that was in the student senate went home and ran for
something and got elected. Now, does Wayne Stark
deserve any credit for some of that? He certainly
did with Chet. He was real close to Chet and real
close to Randy Ross and folks like that. He was a
good friend of mine, but Wayne didn't much advise
the Senate so much as he did the MSC. I was in a bunch
of those clubs in the MSC, but I never went that way
like Kirk Hawkins did and some of those guys with
the MSC. Wayne... I went on a trip that Wayne asked
me to go to one time. It was a skiing trip. One
winter, 300 of us went to Chamonix, France. But on
the way over, six of us in the back of the plane
gathered. Apparently, there were just six of us
that had never seen snow since the seventh grade,
much less skied on it. And so we decided that we're
going to land in Geneva, and we're going to rent a
car, and we're going to go touring Europe for eight
days, and we'll meet you guys back here when you got
back. And we barely made it back in time, and the
plane was fueled, ready to go, and they were going
to give us another 15 minutes, and we finally
straggled in. We ran out of money about halfway
through our trip, so we were sleeping in culverts
before it was over with. But Wayne had a big
influence on lots of kids, I don't think any of us
can explain what it was about that group that got
into politics.
Let's see. MSC during your four years. What was the
MSC? What role did it play on the campus? It was a
huge role. I think one of the reasons that you have
the kind of spirit participation, leadership
training, stuff like that. One of the reasons that
kids come out is that the MSC here has always been so
much bigger than at any other university. It's not
just a place to go bowling. I mean, there are
hundreds and hundreds of organizations, as you
know, that these kids can join and apply
leadership skills to those organizations and
stuff. And so I've
tried to analyze what it is that one of the things
that makes Aggies more successful. I mean
obviously one of them is Aggies hire Aggies. I mean
I'm very guilty of that. I mean I don't know if I ever
had an Aggie apply for a job at the controller of
public accounts that isn't working at the
controller of public accounts. And I did it, of
course, on merit. And it got a little, I mean,
almost to the point of embarrassment sometimes,
because people would write me letters saying, the
only reason I didn't get this job is I didn't have a
ring. And, you know, because of open record stuff,
I wouldn't write back and say, yes, that's true.
But I think the core coupled with the MSC and so many
places for kids to become involved and apply
leadership skills and learn things like that is
one of the reasons that kids do so well. I think the
MSC is the second academics. It's a big part of the
leadership training. Did you ever get one of Wayne
Stark's special lectures, particularly the
green couch treatment? Mm-mm. Do you know what I
mean by the green couch? Uh-uh. Oh, that one, for
those that he thought had high capability
potential but then started goofing off, he
invited you down. Remember his office was down at
the end of the hallway? At the end of the hallway. It
had that sleazy-looking green vinyl-covered
couch. He would invite you in by yourself, close
the door, and put you on that couch. And when you got
through hearing the lecture he gave you, you never
forgot it. And what it really was, he would say,
shame on you. You can do better, and you know you
can. Not long ago, I was asking this in a group of
people of your vintage and older and some of
today's students, and when I asked, did he ever try
the green couch treatment on you, three or four of
today's co-eds gasped because they thought I was
referring to some other kind of treatment. No, no,
no, no, no, no, no. No, I never got that one. I
would... I'd go down... My office was... kind of
down the stairs past the desk down there where the
student president's office was and I'd go down
there and shoot the breeze with Wayne and that's
not a five minute deal. That's right, that's
right. And talk to him and stuff like that, but I
wasn't in, my niche wasn't in the MSC governance
part of it, it was in the student senate part of it. A
tiny little thing about MSC, where did you and your
buddies go for a break during the day? MSC, the only
place to go. Yeah, went in there and it was a good
hiding place for freshmen. Go sit in those couches
and stuff like that. It was kind of a standing room.
Nobody mess with you in the Memorial Student
Center and stuff like that.
Were you part of SCONA? You weren't, were you? No, I
went to just to, I didn't do any organizing for it. I
went to some of the meetings and, you know, helped
get speakers and stuff like that, but that was it.
That's your phone. Oh, no. Oh, I thought I heard it.
Let's see, YMCA was nothing in terms of importance
during your year, was it? Because before MSCC, the
YMCA... Yeah, no, it had, it coordinated fish
camp, that's the best I could tell. Did you ever get
sick and go to the quack shack, the hospital? Yeah.
What was it like, describe the quack shack? Oh,
man, it was appropriately named. I think my senior
year they built a new one, but before that it was,
you come out a lot sicker than you went in. It was a
pretty depressing little place. I hurt myself in
rugby, and that was the only time that I went there.
My junior year I was on the rugby team, and I don't
know what I did. I cracked some vertebrae or
something in my neck or something like that, and
after I went to the I was walking when I went into
Quack Shack. When I came out of Quack Shack, I had to
call my dad and say, you gotta get me to Victoria.
And I was out of school for a week and went down
there. I'm sure it wasn't anything that Quack
Shack did, but they damn sure didn't do anything to
help it. It was located up near the... Yeah, it was
down here kind of across from Sabeasa or somewhere
in here.
Was there a full-time campus doctor or do you
remember? I don't think I ever saw a doctor in
there. There was a couple of nurses and stuff.
Let's see. Gine Hall was demolished during your
student days. Well, I saw the first ball hit Gine
Hall. Really? I watched it happen. There was a big
fence around it. That's where the speech classes
were. The guy that announced the football games,
what was his name? Oh, oh. Good afternoon,
football fans. Welcome to Kyle Field, home of the
fighting Texas Aggies. I took a couple of speech
courses from him. Eastern accent. Yeah. That's
where his offices were in the back of that, but
there was a big fence around it, and they had to
demolish Guy Hall, I guess, to make room for Rudder
Tower. and it was a big deal. They said at 10 o'clock
in the morning the first ball is going to hit Gine
Hall. They'd already taken some bricks off and I
think they had sold them or something and that
wrecking ball just went pow and we watched the
first one hit.
The student body, when you were here, describe the
student body in general. Attitudes, background,
and so forth.
Well, let me describe it in terms of campus
politics because that's what I knew best, I guess.
But you had a, in campus politics, you had a natural
alliance
between the core, Walton Hall, Hart Hall, Fowler
to some extent, some of those old halls. And it all
hinged around the bonfire because there were
certain dormitories that just bore, you know,
civilian dormitories that are hell-bent for
leather. Boy, they have real serious roles. And
whether that's true now, I don't know. But it was
certainly true back then. And so you had, because
of that once-a-year deal, you had outfits in the
Corps that were closely aligned with Walton Hall
or closely aligned with Hart Hall and some of
those.
The student body,
even back then, was just starting to become urban
and suburban. I would say the core was still very
rural, certainly in my dormitory it was. If they
were from the cities, they were from San Antonio.
Liberal, conservative, and basically... Oh,
conservative. Against McGovern, Nixon got 89% of
the campus vote. Very conservative. Their
values. I remember Jerry Geisweier gave a speech
one time in the middle, well, let me give you an idea
of how conservative this student body was. Kent
State, the student senate was not debating
whether or not to fly the half, to flag half staff as
other universities were for the students killed
at Kent State. They were debating whether or not to
fly the flag at half staff for the National
Guardman that was wounded. There was no sentiment
in the Student Senate to fly the half-staff for
those commie pinkos in Kent State. I mean, that was
the attitude. And during that time, when there was
turmoil in the late 60s, early 70s on other
campuses, primarily the Vietnam War, Jerry
Goswine, who was student vice president at the
time, got up and gave a speech at a Mother's Day
crowd And I remember he called A&M the last bastion
of sanity. And Geisweit got more press off that
worldwide than anybody could imagine. Of course,
the former students in the administration, Dean
Hannigan in particular, he thought that was the
best thing in the world. But that was Geisweit's
claim to glory. The way Geisweit got to be student
body president is Gary Morrow ran for student body
president against Al Reiner. Al Reinert, who
wrote this screenplay for Apollo 13. Al, grades
were bad, and they didn't find out until later. And
so rather than make Gary student body president,
they just nullified the election. The election
commission was controlled by the Corps. Geisweit
had won vice president, so they put Geisweit up
against Morrow. Geisweit beat Morrow for student
body president, and that's how he became student
president. Because Ryder won the election. He won
the election. He was on core staff. He was a junior
on core staff. All right, let's see. What about
their attitude about hard work? Hard work? The
student body. Yeah, I think they all kind of came
with that. I mean, it was... Geographic origin.
You said they're small town. Lots of small town.
Income level, family income. Couldn't have been
very high. diversity as we now use that term? Hey,
we're working hard at it, but it wasn't very. I
mean, I know in, I know there
were very few Hispanics, very few blacks in the
Corps or on campus. There were a lot of Asian kids.
Remember there were a couple of dormitories of
Asian kids, but most of them were from overseas uh
hotard hall several halls like that but but um
there were there weren't uh too many that they kind
of started working on that i think about my junior
or senior year the student government was heavily
involved in prayer do you remember there was a
bunch of debate um morrow in particular and a guy
named ken windler and austin are all trying to get
the a m board to give more money to prairie view that
was kind of a cause for the for the few liberals that
were on campus, you know. But it, and that later on
in the legislature got them in trouble.
Wilhelmina Delco really started taking them to
task, but you talk about done good. I mean, I think
even Wilhelmina will say now that A&M is better in
that regard than virtually any university you can
name in the state of Texas. Do you remember any
incidents in the dormitories or in the hallways of
the classroom buildings involving ethnicity and
or a woman student?
Women students. Such as? Well, I mean, stuff that
you would never tolerate now. I mean, when a woman
walked in the quadrangle of the core between 1968
and 1972, that was a major event. very closely
linked to the Second Coming. And people would
scream and holler and... But was it a holler of
approval or disapproval? I suppose it's how she
took it. Oh, no, it was like, look at this. You
haven't seen one of these in a while. All this kind
of stuff. But, yeah, I'm talking about not just
women students walking on. I'm talking about any
woman that walks down there. I'm sure that doesn't
happen now. If it did now, it would be, but it was
just such a rare event. I mean, women, when I
graduated, there were 700 women, more than half of
which were married, and about 14,000 students,
something like that. Am I correct in saying to
people that black students, Hispanic students,
minorities of all sorts, had almost no problems
here. No. I think you are correct in that regard
except on San Jacinto Day and Pearl Harbor Day
because in Pearl Harbor Day I remember they would
go get every Asian student in the Corps and dump
them in a whole groat hole somewhere Even if they
were not Japanese, American? Well, it doesn't
matter. Anywhere close. And everybody laughed
about it, including them. They all thought that
was... And then the Hispanics on San Jacinto Day?
Oh, yeah. Yeah, or anything like that. Or some day
like that.
I imagine if school had been going on on June the
16th or 19th, they would have had the same thing
there. That's the only thing I can remember. They
may get carried away and find some Bohemian
holiday and get all of us who are Czech orientation
looking for an excuse to do it. I think that is an
accurate statement. There weren't very many, but
the black and Hispanic and minority kids nobody
saw the difference. Maybe one of the reasons for
that is when you're going through that hell your
first semester of your freshman year, the last
thing you want to worry about is what color or
background some guy has. You're just trying to
survive this thing and generally the black guy
next to you is trying to survive too. Is that the key
to understanding the Aggie mentality that you're
either an Aggie or you're not and if you are that's
all that matters? I think so. It does. All those old
former students had told us when we were students
that this will carry on afterward. It does. So your
mother was a Czech ancestry, so what?
From the point of view that I've come from, and that
is the core, I think probably the army or war or
things like that are the same as once you go through
it together it doesn't much matter I remember when
the war was over with my father you know talked
about two Hispanic guys can't remember their name
that when he was wounded ran out and pulled him out
of the field of fire and he said oh you'll never hear
me say anything bad about about a a
Mexican-American because it wouldn't be here if
there weren't for those two. Let's see, in terms of
the student body makeup, what about wheels? Who
had a car and what kind of cars? Oh, we had one kid
named K.T. Alexander from Louisiana whose family
had money. He stayed a year and decided that the LSU
fraternity was where he wanted to be but he had a
car. There were very few kids I'm trying to think if
we were allowed cars. I think freshmen were, but
there was a fish parking lot. Now, there were some
kids that had cars. There just wasn't anybody.